# IS310 Data Essay
Avery Webster, Ryan Pearlman, Rebeca Rodriguez, Lhaye Dimarucut, Henry Rotunno

**Introduction - Henry:**
History is an extremely convoluted subject with thousands of accounts of what actually happened. When deciding on a topic, we wanted to be able to demonstrate the complicated patterns of culture and development. At the start of the project, we went back and forth on a couple of humanities topics, some that stretched decades back. As we searched for data, the limitations of a historical topic began to reveal themselves. For a lot of the topics, data was quite scarce which significantly reduced our potential topics. After a few days of unsuccessful searching, we decided to do banned books – the main reason for this choice being the amount of culture associated with books: the author, title, genre, location, contents, and more, which contribute to this cultural phenomenon. Banned books and censorship also have a rich history which we can draw comparisons to. With this knowledge, our group made inferences based on what we know about banned books and their rise in the media. In addition, we briefly discussed the political nature of censorship and how this relates to banned books, such as mass book burnings in Germany. By evaluating the factors of a banned book, it provides an excellent overview of a state's political and social nature. In the end, a lot of our initial inferences were confirmed by our code, such as the majority of banned books including LGBTQ+ terms or residing in southern states. Without analyzing the current trend of banned books, we wouldn’t be able to identify the political and social trajectory of the US, blindsiding our nation to increased censorship. 

The first datasets we utilized were from PEN America, who’s message is “The Freedom to Write.” They are a literature-centric organization founded in 1922 that is dedicated to documenting censorship and standing up for authors. They advocate for free speech and connect authors who deal with censorship based on culture. Based on their impressive track record, we delved into their website and were able to find multiple datasets, all of which contained book bannings from within the last 5 years. The datasets are exceptionally thorough and provided a plethora of information useful for starting our project. This included the title, state, county, date of challenge, and much more. While scrolling through the .csv, we also realized that a lot of points were missing, and it seemed as though most if not all of the data was manually entered. Thus, we enacted a lot of cleaning procedures to ensure a smooth dataset. This realization further cemented our trust in the organization because their dedication to the topic was on full display. One problem we ran into was the dataset for this year; unlike the others, the dataset could not be downloaded. We contacted Dr. Magnusson, the head of the project at PEN America, for permission to use their datasets and for a copy of the inaccessible one. She greenlighted our project and sent us a copy but didn’t allow us to push that copy to GitHub because it was still in progress. Fortunately, the two datasets we could use were more than sufficient enough. With the PEN America datasets at our disposal, we were confident that we could extract cultural significance from banned books and began to brainstorm what variables we could highlight. However, one aspect was missing; we didn’t have a dataset from the past that we could use to compare differences of book banning in the past compared to today. We couldn’t find any other datasets online with nearly the same prestige, quality, and quantity of PEN, therefore we decided to contact and subsequently visit the local archives along with contacting Professor Emily Knox, a prestigious member of the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign School of Information Sciences for her guidance. 

The meeting with the archive group contributed a lot of valuable information, some of which our PEN datasets didn’t include. Using the archives data, we were able to manually construct two datasets; one from 1997-1998 and the other from 1998-1999. A major difference between our two datasets is that for the archives one, we also were able to include data on each book’s genre, which was not present in our PEN America datasets at this point. After we realized how useful genre may be to our cultural investigation, Lhaye started to work on a web-scraping tool which assigned genres to all of the books in our larger PEN America datasets. 

Professor Knox and the Illinois archives staff also approved of our usage of PEN America as a credible and reliable data source, which boosted our confidence about the accuracy of any findings this project yields. By analyzing books that had been banned in the late 90s, we could effectively determine cultural shifts and operationalize censorship. This process is relevant because by comparing the past to today, we can use history as an example of what course we might be on as a society. The conversations with Knox, Magnusson, and the archive group each confirmed our belief in the cultural significance of this project and motivated us to tackle this issue wholeheartedly. At the start of our dataset analysis and visualization, we discussed creating heatmaps to demonstrate the spatial trends of the data. For the computational assignment, we highlighted spatial data which gave us an excellent understanding of how to approach the code. Ryan and Rebecca did a fantastic job creating the maps that can be used to analyze banned books by year and state. It was incredibly satisfying to see our other quantitative data analysis methods match the maps, confirming that Texas and Florida are most eager to ban books, particularly those of social justice and LGBTQ+ content.


**Dataset cleaning – Ryan:**
Now that we had our datasets, it was time to start “cleaning” and modifying them to be used for the rest of our project. The first thing we wanted to do was prepare the datasets for combination. In order to do this, we needed to see which columns were included in all the datasets. The PEN America datasets, though similar, had some slightly different column names for the same data. So, we standardized the names. Then, we removed a few columns that had entirely NaN data. Lastly, for the archives data, when we created the datasets, they were labeled with state names, whilst the other datasets had abbreviations as their states. With the help of ChatGPT, we were able to convert all the state names to abbreviations to be flush with the other data. At this point, we combined all the datasets into one using pd.concat, and started our data grouping process. 

Next, we used ChatGPT to help us scrape the openlibrary website in order to add the genre of each book to its instance in the merged PEN America dataset. This took a lot of working on, and was very difficult to get right. The genres seem to be user-submitted, and many have typos. However, it’s a lot better than nothing, and we didn’t want to remove any genres because of the immense amount of information loss that would bring with it. We structured the URLs to fetch information from Open Library and add it to a new genre column in our dataset. Many of our books didn’t contain any genre, and those were labeled as “Unknown.” Overall, about seventy percent of the books were assigned genres, which we were content with.

A problem with our genre data was that some books were attributed with many genres, and they would all be put into one genre label. One of the books had as many as 120 genres in the same exact row. In order to fix this, we added six new genre columns and separated the genres by their commas. The first genre would go in the column Genre1, the second would go in Genre2, etc. followed by a “remaining_genres” column. We decided that five individual genres per book was more than enough, and even if a book had more than five genres, the remaining genres would be added to the final column. 

We visualized our data in many ways, including using word clouds, a kepler timeline visualization of the United States, a folium heatmap of the United States, and interactive altair graphs of authors, states, book bans, and genres. Each of these included a big learning curve to get right, as we hadn’t explicitly learned about any of them besides altair before. For the heatmaps, we needed exact location data for each book, which was created with the help of ChatGPT. We were able to plot an exact set of coordinates for each state–we chose where the state’s capital is–and created a function that goes through the dataset and adds a column with the latitude and longitude of each book to it. Again, this took some cleaning to make sure the state names were standardized across the set. For the kepler visualization, we also had to add in a time for each book’s ban, with a date formatted precisely in MM/DD/YYYY HH:MM, otherwise the visualization wouldn’t work. This took a while to figure out why the visualization wasn’t working, and then even more time to create a function to convert all of our dates to the correct formatting and times. Some dates were simply things like “Fall 2022,” which we had to remove from the kepler dataset since we don’t know which month that is. The days and times were simply set to the first day of the month at 00:00, since we only had the month of each ban in our dataset to work with. 

When we initially started our project, we had the PEN America datasets early on, and that was it. After our trip to the archives, we merged those datasets in. Then, when we decided we wanted to make visualizations and experiment with our dataset, we worried about the states and genres of each book. 


**Final dataset and visualizations - Avery:**
All of this marked the completion of our final dataset. It included eighteen columns, those being author, title, ban status, secondary author(s), illustrators(s), translator(s), state, district, date of challenge/removal, origin of challenge, genre, genre1, genre2, genre3, genre4, genre5, remaining genres and coordinates. Our final dataset contains 5893 rows/observations.

Description of columns:
- Author: the author of the banned book
- Title: the full title of the banned book
- Ban Status: the current information of the ban, whether it has been banned and the extent that it has (like banned in schools, banned in libraries, banned pending investigation, etc.)
- Secondary Author(s): list of additional authors who contributed to writing the banned book
- Illustrator(s): list of illustrators who contributed to the banned book
- Translator(s): list of translators who contributed to writing the banned book
- State: the US state in which the book was banned
- District: the US district in which the book was banned
- Date of Challenge/Removal: the month and year when the book was initially challenged by someone or banned outright
- Origin of Challenge: the roots of the initial challenge to ban the book, like whether it came from an administrator, legislative action, etc.
- Genre: a list of every genre applicable to the banned book
- Genre1: the book’s first listed genre (if applicable) 
- Genre2: the book’s second listed genre (if applicable) 
- Genre3: the book’s third listed genre (if applicable) 
- Genre4: the book’s fourth listed genre (if applicable) 
- Genre5: the book’s fifth listed genre (if applicable) 
- Remaining_genres: any remaining genres the book has outside the first five (if applicable)
- Coordinates: the coordinates that coincide with the US states (for folium heat map)
- Latitude: latitude for US state data (for Kepler heat map)
- Longitude: longitude for US state data (for Kepler heat map)
- Formatted_data: date and time when a book was banned for timeline purposes (for Kepler heat map)

Data visualizations:
For our first data visualization, we wanted to make something rather simple in order to illustrate common occurrences within this dataset. We landed on creating word clouds, as they were able to properly express the information we wanted. We created two word clouds, the first showing the authors found the most in our dataset. The other shows the book titles found the most in the dataset. In order to make these word clouds, we created a dictionary of the authors using value counts in pandas. One issue that arose from the author word cloud was the format of the authors. The authors were listed as “last name, first name”, which was not visually pleasing. We fixed this by splitting the values up by the comma, deleting the comma, and then reversing the order so now everything was formatted nicely. 

When finished, the author word cloud conveyed some cultural themes in our dataset that were commonly found amongst these visualizations. The most common authors generally had similar themes in their books. For example, Ellen Hopkins, the most frequent author in the dataset, writes young adult novels, many of which were banned due to their sexual themes. Sarah J. Mass, the second most frequent author, writes the same type of books and is banned for the same reasons. Lauren Myracle and Maia Kobabe follow the same trend. There are outliers amongst the most banned authors, like Toni Morrison, whose books are banned for depicting topics like systemic racism (though many districts claim it is for profanity). Overall, this word cloud gave us the information we needed to uncover the occurrences of these banned books. The theme is generally young adult novels with themes of sexual nature. Many school districts and libraries do not want teenagers reading these books. 

The book title word cloud indicated similar themes. The most banned book, titled “Gender Queer: A Memoir” by Maia Kobabe, depicts the life of the author growing up and discovering her sexuality. The second most banned book, “All Boys Aren’t Blue” by George M. Johnson, is essentially about the same thing. However, in this word cloud, there were more books depicting racism, like “The Hate U Give” by Angie Thomas and “The Bluest Eye” by Toni Morrison. Many books were also banned for depictions of suicide, like “Thirteen Reasons Why” by Jay Asher. Again, almost every book present in this word cloud is a young adult novel. These word clouds showcase the most common trend with book banning in America. The books banned in this dataset are frequently designed for teenagers to read. Many libraries and schools make a point of banning these books in order to prevent teens from reading them. There are very few adult books that were banned. 

For our next data visualization, we wanted to depict the common book banning trends of the US states. To do this, we created an Altair visualization that depicts the most banned book from each state in our dataset. The interactive bar graph includes the title and author of the most banned books, as well as the ban count. We created this visualization by grouping together the title and author columns to create a dataset of the number of times a book has been banned in each state. We then filtered it down to the highest ban count value in each state, and dropped any duplicates. This visualization gives us a pretty good sense of how states are going about banning books. 

The books aren’t banned at the state level, rather by districts and counties. Many states in this dataset have only banned books once, indicating that there aren’t common themes of book banning in the state, and that any instances of book banning are isolated incidents from one district. Other states, like Texas and Florida, have banned books several times. The states with book banning trends happen to be generally republican-leaning, including Florida, Texas, Missouri, North Carolina, and Pennsylvania. However, it is worth noting that many of the states in our dataset are quite split in their general political ideologies. We expected overwhelmingly republican states like Oklahoma and West Virginia to have more book bans, but that wasn’t the case. It is possible that books are being banned to stir drama and create political attention. 

The next visualization we created was a combination of the two previous word clouds, which helped us further confirm the trends of young adult novels being banned in schools. This interactive bar chart includes the top fifty most banned authors, their most banned book, how many times it has been banned and every state that banned it. In order to do this, we grouped together our dataset by author to find how many times they have been banned. We then filtered this to only include the author’s book found most in the dataset, what we’ll call their most banned book. Once again, the visualization confirmed the fact that young adult novels are getting banned more than any other type of book. The top ten most banned books in this visualization are all depictions of teenagers. They covered themes of sexuality, racism, mental health, etc. However, the individual states they were banned in didn’t tell us much, since it was a wide array of bans. District data would have told us more, but we were unable to find an efficient and pragmatic way to get and incorporate it within our dataset. We would have to do it manually, which simply isn’t realistic based on the time constraints of this project. 


**Final dataset usage guidelines and scholarly application - Rebeca**

Description:
Title: the_final_dataset (Book Bans in the United States from 1997-1999 and 2021-2023)
This dataset contains information about what books have been banned throughout the United States during 1997 through 1999 and 2021 through 2023. It includes information about the banned book including the title, author, secondary authors, illustrators, the location including the state, district, and coordinates with latitude and longitude, the type of challenge, the date that the book was challenged with another column having the formatted date, up to six genres, and the ban status. 

This dataset can be used for statistical analysis by using the numerical data. The other columns can be used for an exploratory data analysis. The coordinates with latitude and longitude can be used to find specific states in the United States. It is also possible to create basic visualizations, statistical visualizations as well as geographical visualizations. 

Sources:
This dataset was compiled through reports from PEN America and the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign Archives.

The data used for the 2022 - 2023 dataset was found here: https://pen.org/book-bans/2023-banned-book-list/. 

The data used for the 2021 - 2022 was found here: https://pen.org/book-bans/banned-book-list-2021-2022/. 

The data from 1997 through 1999 was found through Banned Books: 1998 Resource Guide by Robert P. Doyle and Banned Books: Resource Guide 1999 by Robert P. Doyle. This guide was found by going to our archives.

Potential Scholarly Applications:
Socio-Political Patterns: 
This dataset offers a more numerical focus on book bans, but that information can be applied to social aspects and can be used to find trends that relate to book bans and these socio-political patterns. That can be found using the data found in genres, the frequency of book bans per state, and the location of the bans. It is encouraged for scholars to study the relationship between cultural and social dynamics and book bans, such as Emily Knox’s “Book Banning in 21st-Century America”, which focuses on censorship through book bans in the United States. (Knox, 2015). “Book bans in political context: Evidence from US schools” by Goncalve, Langrock, LaViolette, and Spoon finds trends relating book bans to the censorship of authors that are women and people of color. (Goncalves, Et al. 2024).

Policy Analysis: 
Researchers are able to analyze the dataset to find the frequency of bans per state, or per district of city, that can aid in finding how censorship is spread out in the United States. Scholars are encouraged to use those results to go deeper into the relationship between policy and censorship through those states. This can include any legislative or policy violations. For example, Robert Kim analyzed how censorship caused by book bans violates the first amendment and explored the legislative powers that school officials have (Kim, 2022). 

Education:
Researchers can use the dataset’s location to find what schools that have been affected by the bans. Through those findings, the scholar can investigate if there has been a limit on academic freedom through the increasing number of bans throughout the United States. For instance, Pincus used book bans to analyze how educators and students are responding to books being banned in schools. He also goes into the different powers that school officials and these groups that are for books being banned (Pincus, 1985). 

Advocacy:
Scholars can use the frequency and location of the book bans to investigate how censorship is affecting other public services. Another illustration of this is Cauley’s “Banned Books behind Bars: Prototyping a Data Repository to Combat Arbitrary Censorship Practices in U.S. Prisons”, which focuses on the social project called “Banned Books behind Bars”, a project that is aimed to inform people about the issue that prisons have with access to information, in particular, books and printed information. One of the obstacles for getting access to information is through book bans (Cauley, 2020). The use of this dataset can create impactful results that can aid in advocacy. 

Citations - Rebeca:
Cauley, K. (2020). Banned Books behind Bars: Prototyping a Data Repository to Combat Arbitrary Censorship Practices in U.S. Prisons. Humanities, 9(4), 131. https://doi.org/10.3390/h9040131

Goncalves, M. S. O., Langrock, I., LaViolette, J., & Spoon, K. (2024). Book bans in political context: Evidence from US schools. PNAS Nexus, 3(6). https://doi.org/10.1093/pnasnexus/pgae197 

Knox, E. (2015). Book Banning in 21st-Century America. Rowman & Littlefield.

Kim, R. (2022). Under The Law: Banning books: Unlawful censorship, or within a school’s discretion? Phi Delta Kappan, 103(7), 62–64. https://doi.org/10.1177/00317217221092240 

Pincus, F. L. (1985). Book Banning and the New Right: Censorship in the Public Schools. The Educational Forum, 49(1), 7–21. https://doi.org/10.1080/00131728409335817 


**Dataset limitations - Lhaye:**
For the aim of our project, our main goal was to find any cultural significance of banned books in the US, looking at databases, archive paperworks, and websites that can help us gain any information. We initially had some challenges finding databases as many of banned book datasets are confidential and anonymous, therefore not available on the open web. Eventually we found the Pen American Dataset from 2022 and an additional dataset by them from 2023. However, since it was difficult to find any other dataset online, we soon decided to look at other resources within the archives, which also proved difficult to access recent information or anything much valuable. 

Looking at other resorts, we thought that web scraping could be beneficial as a lot of book websites such as American Library Association(ALA) or goodreads had listings of banned books. However, we were unfortunate as information was restricted through web scraping. So overall we were only with ban book data from 2021-23 and 1997-1999 via archive paperworks. While we have a dataset to look through, it gives us a limitation as we have a range of information we aren't able to evaluate due to the lack of years available to analyze.  

Along with the dataset, we have limitations analyzing patterns within the ban book genres. We had decided to pull from the open library but found it quite challenging, as the open library had several types of genres listed to one book. By analyzing what we pull from the open library genre, we noticed a lot of misspelled words, confusing genre titles and a lot of inconsistencies. With all these inconsistencies, it was hard to fully create visualizations or analyzation. Along with that, we initially wanted to have just one or two genres for one book, however with books having several types of genres listed, it was hard to determine which one to choose as its main genre. 

With the process and challenges we encountered, we hope later in the future to have a cleaner dataset to better reflect the cultural significance of banned books. For instance, we hope to have a cleaner version of our genre columns in hopes to have a better way to analyze them. This would be helpful to seek the most popular genres being banned or any type of relationships. Along with that, we would try to find more datasets of books banned from a range of time, rather than having only chunks from two time periods. This would allow us to potentially see an increase in books being banned or any patterns related. Overall, a more comprehensive and refined dataset would allow us to better draw deeper insights into the cultural and societal trends surrounding book bans. By this, it would allow us to understand how book bans evolve over time and identity specific relationships that help influence these decisions. 


**Labor Distribution - Everyone:**
Lastly, for our labor distribution, it is seen throughout this with each of our names directly before our written portion. For the other parts of this project, our README files on each file of our GitHub have documented who has done what for each step of the project.



Thank you for taking the time to read through our project, and we hope you found it interesting and useful in your future endeavors! If you have any questions, please don’t hesitate to reach out to any of us!
-IS310 Fall 2024 Group 2
