# Experimenting With Datasets Update

#### For this part of the project, we wanted to use the geographical information systems (GIS) method that Rebeca explored from our computing cultural data assignment. In order to do this, we started by looking at our data and seeing how we could graph it. The first thing we noticed is that we have a list of states and dates for each of the book bans from our 2021-2022 and 2022-2023 datasets, and some locations and dates for the archives data. With this knowledge, we decided it would be best to use a map of the United States with a way to move through time, looking for patterns via heatmap in how many books have been banned during those years. 

#### One of the first problems we encountered was that not many of our datapoints from the archives had data about the state and specific time they were banned in. Even when they did, there just wasn’t enough data and it was too far removed from the rest of the dataset time to make sense to include. This wasn’t a desirable outcome because of the work that went in to getting that data, and how long it took to manually create. On top of that, information loss is never a good thing.

#### With our two datasets in mind, we moved forward to looking at how to actually make this data plotted onto a map. We first tried the website datawrapper.de. This website worked well for creating a heat map for each state, but it didn’t show the change over time like we were initially hoping for. Following this, we decided to take Professor LeBlanc’s recommendation of Kepler into consideration. The data at first didn’t really work with the website, and it took some time to figure out why. We needed to have exact dates and proper formatting for the data, but our data was only–for example–“August 2022” which isn’t compatible as far as we could tell. We decided to make all of data points onto the first day of each month. Our final dates looked like “08/01/2021 00:00.” This format change was accomplished with the help of ChatGPT, and only took a few lines of code. Next, just having a state wasn’t good enough for Kepler. We decided to make a heatmap based on the coordinate location of each capital for each state. We used ChatGPT once again to create a dictionary of each capital and its coordinate location. We then mapped each location to the longitude and latitude of its coordinates via a function that ChatGPT made. Lastly, we made sure Kepler had a heatmap with points that get bigger over time as more books are banned in that state. Unfortunately, with this data visualization we have no way to store the authors’ names or the names of the books, which is again a catastrophic loss of information for our final product.

#### Our final Kepler output is in the file named "kepler.gl.json" in this folder. To see it for yourself, go to kepler.gl/demo and drop in the file.