# Experimenting with datasets
## Welcome! This assignment is very important and contains a lot of hard work from all of us!
This file contains the links to each of our initial datasets, some of our visualizations to be uploaded, and more! In this README, you'll find the rationale behind our project and each of our visualizations.

### Files:
- code.ipynb: this file contains all of our code we used. It's commented in an easy to understand way for anyone. 
- kepler.gl.json: this file contains our kepler visualization. Simply download the code and go to kepler's website, press get started, and drop in the file to see it. 
- books_with_genres_final.csv: this file has a final dataset of every book, genre, title, author, and more for all of our data. This way, anyone can simply download this dataset and put up where we left off instead of having to run our code on the files themselves. 


### Introduction:
Our project looks to encompass and visualize the cultural significance of banned books in the U.S. What we sought is the pattern of what constitutes a banned book, highlighting variables such as author, title, contents, genre, and region. At the start of the project, we quickly discovered that the datasets online were largely open source and up to interpretation. Our main datasets came from PEN America which is an organization committed to spreading awareness about this controversial issue. We chose two datasets from PEN America, one from 2021-2022 and one from 2022-2023 because they are relatively thorough and contain a lot of books. Our team sent an email to the organization and received the greenlight to manipulate the dataset. However, they didn’t allow us to use a 2023-2024 set because it is still in progress. In addition, part of our group met with an archivist to obtain datasets from the late 90s. The archive group was thrilled to hear about our project and presented us with a lot of valuable information on the subject. By having these two datasets, we were able to compare book banning trends from 20 years ago and make conclusions based on the differences. Today, we will demonstrate multiple computational methods to showcase banned books and culture. 

### Relevance:
Our dataset is relevant because there are more book bans in recent years than ever before, and some bans are getting a ton of media publicity. The concept of what constitutes a banned book is interpretative. On PEN America’s website, there exists a complicated set of criteria for their requirements as to what constitutes a book ban. There isn’t any universal law for what a book ban is, meaning some datasets will be different from others based on who’s deciding what a book ban is and their standards. These book bans are significant for many reasons, and it’s important to try our best to understand this cultural phenomenon.

### Reflection and Future Work:
For the whole of our project, our main goal was to find any cultural significance of banned books in the US, looking at databases, archive paperworks and websites that can help us gain any information. We initially had some challenges finding databases as many of banned book datasets are confidential and anonymous, therefore not available on the open web. Even through websites such as American Library Association(ALA) or goodreads, we were unfortunate as information was restricted through web scraping. Eventually, we did come fortunate to the PEN dataset, but only data from 2022-2024. This left us with ban book data from 2022-24 and 1998-1999 via archive paperworks. This however,gives us a chunk of information we aren't able to evaluate.  
Along with the dataset, we have limitations analyzing patterns within the ban book genres. We had decided to pull from the open library but found it quite challenging, as the open library had several types of genres listed to one book. By analyzing what we pull from the open library genre, we noticed a lot of misspelled words, confusing genre titles and a lot of inconsistencies. With all these inconsistencies, it was hard to fully create visualizations or analyzation, when there were vast elements to clean in the data. Along with that, we initially wanted to have just one or two genres for one book, however with books having several types of genres listed, it was hard to determine which one to choose as its main genre. 
With the process and challenges we encountered, we hope later in the future to have a cleaner dataset to better reflect the cultural significance of banned books. For instance, we hope to have a cleaner version of our genre columns in hopes to have a better way to analyze them. This would be helpful to seek the most popular genres being banned or any type of relationships. Along with that, we would try to find more datasets of books banned from a range of time, rather than having only chunks from two time periods. This would allow us to potentially see an increase in books being banned or any patterns related. Overall, a more comprehensive and refined dataset would allow us to better draw deeper insights into the cultural and societal trends surrounding book bans. By this, it would allow us to understand how book bans evolve over time and identity specific relationships that help influence these decisions. 


### Visualizations reflections (reasoning, process, issues, and insights):
#### Word clouds:
We chose to utilize word clouds for visualizations relating to which author and title were banned the most. These visualizations allow someone to easily see at a glance which authors and which books were banned the most. Although it doesn't give too much specific information, these visualizations are helpful for the general public and are good for someone who doesn't have much time to look into our project in depth.  

#### Altair graph visualizations:
We utilized altair for some of our visualizations involving author, state, and genre. These interactive visualizations allowed us to look at a bar graph showing which states were most banned; and when hovered on each state shows the title and author of the most banned book in that state. The second visualization is of the top 50 most banned authors in any state. The third is of the top 15 genres, and which state banned that genre most. These visualizations were extremely informative, assuming one took the time to really look through them. The states visualization shows how some states have far and away many more bans than the others. The most banned authors visualization shows how some authors are banned in many states, well others are banned in only few. There could be something worth looking into more here. The final visualization here lets us know that some states seem to have an inclination toward banning a certain kind of book, which one wouldn't really consider to be the case at first. 

#### Heat maps:
For this assignment, we created two heat maps. One using kepler, and the other using folium. For these visualizations, we had to create a dictionary of the longitude and latitude of each state. For the kepler visualization, we had to add a specifically formatted time to each instance of the data in order to create a timeline animation for book bans in each state. Creating the code that added the locations and times was very difficult, and the heatmaps were very finicky. The visualizations are very insightful, as they help highlight how many states don't even have any books banned in our dataset, which was very surprising. One would expect the dataset creator to have gotten information from all the states, or that if all known data is collected then there would be at least one ban in each state. 


### Individual contributions to this assignment:
- Avery: Avery was responsible for creating the word cloud visualizations as well as putting everything into one vscode notebook, cleaning it up and adding comments to it.
- Henry: Henry was responsible for creating some of the altair visualizations as well as writing the introduction to the assignment. 
- Lhaye: Lhaye was responsible for creating a piece of code that gives each book a genre in our dataset via web scraping. Lhaye also wrote the future work part of our reflection.
- Ryan: Ryan was responsible for writing the cultural relevance portion of the assignment, cleaning all the datasets and adding coordinates and time stamps, and creating the kepler visualization.
- Rebeca: Rebeca was responsible for creating a heatmap visualization and labeling the genres for the archives dataset. 